adr-0053 Observability data for platform services (#963)
elastisys/compliantkubernetes: docs/adr/0053-observability-data-for-platform-services.md

# Handling Observability Data for Platform Observability Services

- Status: Accepted
- Deciders: Arch Meeting
- Date: 2024-04-04

## Context and Problem Statement

> We need to manage observability data (logs, metrics, traces) from both external and public clients, ensuring secure ingestion of data into our Platform observability stack (OpenSearch for logs, Prometheus for metrics, and Jaeger for traces). There are two distinct categories of clients sending observability data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are being asked whether we can manage observability data (logs, metrics, traces) from external and/or public clients, ensuring secure ingestion of data into our Platform observability stack (OpenSearch for logs, Prometheus for metrics, and Jaeger for traces). There are two distinct categories of clients sending observability data:
```

> **External Clients:** Systems or services under the control of application developers, such as VMs or servers running in trusted environments like Safespring etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**External Clients:** Systems or services under the control of application developers, such as VMs or servers running in trusted environments like Safespring etc. External clients can authenticate using an API key or equivalent.
```

> **Public Clients:** Applications that run on devices or in browsers that are not under the control of application developers, such as mobile apps (Flutter) and Single-Page Applications (Angular), which are exposed to the public internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Public Clients:** Applications that run on devices or in browsers that are not under the control of application developers, such as mobile apps (Flutter) and Single-Page Applications (Angular), which are exposed to the public internet. Public clients cannot be authenticated using an API key or equivalent, since that API key could be easily extracted from the public client.
```

The core problem is how to securely manage the ingestion of observability data from both external and public clients into the Platform observability stack.

- Can we allow external clients to push observability data directly to our Platform observability services?
- Can we allow public clients (e.g., mobile apps, SPAs) to push observability data directly to our Platform observability services?

## Decision Drivers

- We want to maintain platform security and stability.
- We want to avoid operational complexity.
- We want to best serve the Application Developers.
- We want to make the Platform Administrator life easier.

## Considered Options

> 1. Allow Public and External Clients to push Data directly to our Platform observability services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Allow Public and External Clients to push Data directly to our platform observability services.
```

I would only capitalize terms which are part of our [Glossary](https://elastisys.io/compliantkubernetes/glossary/) or defined in our [Terms of Service](https://elastisys.com/legal/terms-of-service/).

Author: Agreed and noted with thanks, Fixed and updated :)

> 1. Do not allow Public Clients to push data directly to our Platform observability services but allow External Clients with authentication and authorization mechanisms.

Reviewer: I would start with the positive decision first.
